Modesty is absolutely essential to having a good relationship with our Heavenly Father,
Jehovah.
We remember what Micah chapter 6 and verse 8 tells us.
He has told you, oh man, what is good and what is Jehovah requiring of you only to exercise
justice, to cherish loyalty and to walk in modesty with your God.
Now what does modesty mean to you?
You probably, when you listen to the comments this morning, you heard a variety of different
definitions.
All of them had a common theme, but each one had a slightly different sense.
The watchtower of 2000 made some very interesting comments about the definition of modesty.
It said, modesty can mean a number of things, such as a lack of conceit or vanity and a
reluctance to boast about one's abilities, achievements and possessions.
According to one reference work, modesty also means keeping within bounds.
A modest person stays within the bounds of good behavior.
He also acknowledges that there are limits to what he ought to do and is able to do.
He knows that there are things to which he is not entitled.
That's a very interesting definition, isn't it?
And it kind of helps us to see that there's many shades of meaning involved with this
word.
But let's center our discussion this morning on that last thought.
A modest person acknowledges that there are limits to what he ought to do and is able
to do.
Now to be modest, we understand involves recognizing our own personal limitations.
And sometimes it's easier to be able to see our physical limitations.
For example, if you're not a strong swimmer, probably when you go to the beach, you won't
swim right out into the ocean, will you?
You'll recognize your limitation.
Or if you're not in good shape, you probably won't sign up for the New York Marathon.
You see, we are able to see that we're not able to do some of these physical tasks.
But modesty goes far beyond just simply acknowledging our own physical limitations.
Now let's look at an example from the scriptures that can help us to see this perhaps more clearly.
Let's go to 1 Samuel, chapter 26, and we're going to start reading here at verse 7.
So 1 Samuel 26, verse 7.
Now just to set the context for you here, you'll remember that David had been hiding from
King Saul who was seeking to kill him.
Now a golden opportunity came for David now to be able to put an end to Saul and to all
of this hiding that David had had to be doing for so long.
Now let's read what it says, verse 7.
So David and Abyssal made their way to the troops by night.
They found Saul lying asleep in the camp enclosure with his spear stuck to the ground next to
his head.
Abner and the troops were lying all around him.
Abyssal, I now said to David, today God has surrendered your enemy into your hand.
And now please let me pin him to the ground with the spear just once, and I will not need
to do it twice.
However, David said to Abyssal, do not harm him for who can lift his hand against the
anointed of Jehovah and remain innocent.
David continued, as surely as Jehovah is living, Jehovah himself will strike him down,
or his day will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and perish.
It is unthinkable from Jehovah's standpoint for me to lift my hand against the anointed
of Jehovah.
So now take please the spear next to his head and the water jug and let us be on our way.
Well now it would have been so easy for David to kill Saul, right?
But what helped David to act modestly in this situation?
Well, let's consider the first factor.
David had to consider his own position or his own authority.
Now had Jehovah instructed David to kill Saul?
No.
Jehovah had never assigned David to carry out that task.
After all, Saul was anointed by Jehovah to be the king of Israel.
So David acknowledged that he simply did not have the authority to kill Saul.
It was not his place.
But now let's consider a second factor.
Notice verse 10, do you remember what David said?
He said, as surely as Jehovah is living, Jehovah himself will strike him down, or his day
will come and he will die, or he will go down into battle and perish.
Well, what's the point?
You see, David had complete confidence in Jehovah.
You see, instead of taking matters into his own hands, he had the total confidence
that Jehovah was going to handle this situation in his own way and in his own time.
David modestly trusted in Jehovah.
Well, David acted modestly on that occasion, but perhaps you can think of a few other
occasions later in his life when he didn't act so modestly.
What's the lesson?
Modesty is a quality that we must work hard to develop, but we must also work hard to
maintain our modesty.
Otherwise, our minds can begin to focus on our strengths, on our talents, and on our
abilities to such an extent that we begin to get a very distorted view of self.
When that happens, our modesty can begin to disappear and we can begin to behave presumptuously.
Now, who's one of the greatest examples of this in the Bible?
Well, perhaps a way you think of the example of Eusiah.
If you go in your Bible to 2 Chronicles chapter 26, let's just review for a minute what
we know about Eusiah and what happened to him.
You see in 2 Chronicles 26 and verse 4, do you see what it says?
He, speaking of Eusiah, continued to do what was right in Jehovah's eyes, just as his father
Amaziah had done, and he kept, you notice this?
He kept searching for God in the days of Zechariah who taught him to fear the true God.
During the time he was searching for Jehovah, the true God made him prosper.
Now, do you hear the modesty there?
Did you hear it?
Well, you see, it says Eusiah was not a self-satisfied person at that point in his life.
He was searching for Jehovah.
He felt the need for Jehovah's guidance and wisdom and blessing in his life.
But what happened?
If you go down to verse 16, do you see?
However, as soon as he was strong, his heart became hotty to his own ruin.
And he acted unfaithfully against Jehovah his God by entering the temple of Jehovah to
burn incense on the altar of incense.
Can you imagine?
He became so emboldened that he actually went into Jehovah's temple and burned incense
on the altar of incense.
Well, the priests came running.
And what did they say to him?
You see, verse 18, it is not proper for you, Eusiah, to burn incense to Jehovah.
It is only the priests who should burn incense.
For there, the descendants of Aaron, those who have been sanctified, go out from the sanctuary.
For you have acted unfaithfully and you will receive no glory from Jehovah God for this.
Well, Eusiah started out fearing God.
He started out searching for Jehovah.
But when he became powerful, what happened?
He quickly lost his modesty.
Well, now, brothers, why is this an important discussion really for all of us?
Well, all of us face trying situations in life.
And when we face those situations, we may be tempted to want to rush in and handle them.
We may be tempted to ignore Bible principles and even publish direction that we have
from the faithful and discreet slave.
How wise we are.
In those moments, in those situations, to step back for a moment, take a deep breath,
account to ten, and say to ourselves, do I really have the authority to do what I'm about to do?
Is it really my place to say what I'm about to say?
Instead, would it be better to wait on Jehovah to correct this situation?
You see, by having a proper view of self, by sticking closely to the direction that we have from Jehovah
and from the faithful and discreet slave, and by maintaining our full and complete confidence
that Jehovah will correct any matters that need to be rectified,
we can have the privilege to walk, not just for a short time,
but to walk eternally in modesty with our magnificent, our wonderful God, Jehovah.